---
title: AWS CodeWhisperer case study
author: Ole Martin Keiseraas <olemartinkeis>
tags: AWS, case study, AI, CodeWhisperer
---

## Introduction

Amazon CodeWhisperer is a general purpose, machine learning-powered code generator that provides you with code recommendations in real time. As you write code, CodeWhisperer automatically generates suggestions based on your existing code and comments. 

Your personalized recommendations can vary in size and scope, ranging from a single line comment to fully formed functions.

## Brief History

CodeWhisperers release:

- 2022, June 22.: CodeWhisperer released for Java, JavaScript, and Python. Supports some IDE's. You had to get whitelisted by Amazon, but generally most people got to use it.
- 2022, July 19.: CodeWhisperer is released for AWS Lambda Console in a preview format. Same as earlier, you had to get whitelisted.
- 2023, April 13: Codewhisperers full release, supports lots of different languages and IDE's. Free for all or a paid version for companies.


## Main Features

Amazon CodeWhisperer is a AI code generator that helps you with your code. It writes complete functions just by looking at your code.


Example feature table:

| Feature | Description |
| --- | --- |
| Real-time code suggestions | AWS CodeWhisperer is trained on billions of line of code from both public and Amazon available code. Codewhisperer can read you comments and generate code suggestion in real time to increase your producitivity |
| Programming languages: | Python, Java, JavaScript, TypeScript, C#, Go, Rust, PHP, Ruby, Kotlin, C, C++, Shell scripting, SQL, and Scala.|
| IDEs | JetBrains IDEs (IntelliJ IDEA, PyCharm, WebStorm, and Rider), Visual Studio (VS) Code, AWS Cloud9, AWS Lambda console, JupyterLab and Amazon SageMaker Studio. |
| Optimized for AWS services | CodeWhisperer provides optimized code for all of Amazons APIs. |
| Built-in Security scans | The service analyzes existing code in the IDE (whether generated by CodeWhisperer or written by you), identifies problematic code with high accuracy, and provides intelligent suggestions on how to fix it. |
| Code responsibly: Refrence tracker for open-source code | CodeWhisperer provides a built-in reference tracker that detects whether a code suggestion might resemble open-source training data and can flag such suggestions. This feature can also be turned off if you wanted to |
| Code responsibly: Bias avoidance | CodeWhisperer helps developers avoid bias by filtering out code suggestions that might be considered biased and unfair.  |
| Enterprise administration | Manage group-wide policies, such as including suggestions with referenced code. |
| Customizable keys | Edit you key-bindings in the CodeWhisperer menu |
| Quick to Install | Start using CodeWhisperer within minutes |

To read more in detail about each of the features: - [Click here](https://aws.amazon.com/codewhisperer/features/)

## Market Comparison - Github Copilot vs. Amazon CodeWhisperer

At first glance, both Copilt and CodeWhisperer looks similiar. They both cover the same needs and you can use them the same way, and both are cloud-based solutions. The bottom line of these AI-based helpers is that you basically describe what you want your code to do, and they auto-suggest the code you need. A third similarity is that neither tool claims they can make an entire software program on its own.

The biggest difference between Copilot and CodeWhisperer is that Copilot is built to be more of a general-purpose AI-assisted dev tool, CodeWhisperer is built in-mind of developers working with Amazon platforms. You can still use CodeWhisperer almost everywhere else, but this is what it was designed for.

It is recommended that you use CodeWhisperer for Amazon products instead of Copilot. But as an opposite, Copilot is hosted on a Microsoft-platform but doesnt cater in any special way to Windows. Copilot is a general-purpose tool.


## Getting Started

Small guide on how to install Amazon CodeWhisperer for Visual Studio Code. Want a more in-depth guide? - [Click here](https://aws.amazon.com/codewhisperer/resources/#Getting_started)

1. Go to the extensions tab in your IDE. Search for AWS Toolkit, and download the latest version.
2. Open the AWS extension panel and select the "Start" button under "Developer Tools" > "CodeWhisperer". In the resulting pop-up select the "Sign in with Builder ID" option. 
3. Use your email address to sign up and/or sign in with your AWS Builder ID.
4. Enjoy CodeWhisperer!

## Conclusion

All in all CodeWhisperer is a decent candidate amongst the AI-driven coding generators out there in the market, it has compatibility with a lot of coding languages and IDEs. It was specifically designed for Amazons own products(AWS, Amazon API's, and so forth), but can be used in other programs and languages. 

CodeWhisperer is totally free, but has paid options for businesses. CodeWhisperer strengths are support for a wide range of languages, IDE's, free of charge and if you are to use Amazons Web Services.

If you compare CodeWhisperer to other AI code generators you will see that there are a lot of choices in the market today. And some might be better suited for you.

## References

- [What is CodeWhisperer?](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/codewhisperer/latest/userguide/what-is-cwspr.html)
- [CodeWhisperer Full Release](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/amazon-codewhisperer-free-for-individual-use-is-now-generally-available/)
- [Codewhisperer Lambda Release](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/compute/introducing-amazon-codewhisperer-in-the-aws-lambda-console-in-preview/)
- [CodeWhisperer Preview Release](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/machine-learning/introducing-amazon-codewhisperer-the-ml-powered-coding-companion/)

## Additional Resources

- [CodeWhisperer documentation](https://aws.amazon.com/codewhisperer/resources/?ref=dc&id=m1)
