# Supabase case study

## Introduction
Supabase is an open-source relational database for websites and applications. It is a young company in the marked and is aiming to make developers work easier.

## Brief History
-	2012: Firebase launced public, first product Firebase Realtime Database.
-	2019: Supabase starts development as an open-source alternative to Firebase
(Startup developers wanted to make dabatase that was easier to use then  Firebase)
-	2020: Supabase accepted to YCombinator (investor for startups) 
-	2020: Supabase working on Auth
-	2020: Supabase working on Stability, Performance, and Security
-	2023: Supabase offers functionality to transform and resize images dynamically

## Features
### Strengths:
-	open-source database
-	store large files and media
-	user authentication
-	autogenerated API
-	instant updates
-	security policies gives control of who can access our data
- useful dashboard UI
-	pricing – unlimited API calls that makes it very cheap in comparison with other backend providers
-	available self-hosting
-	possible to migrate project without vendor lock-in

### Weaknesses
-	young developing project that have bugs
-	missing phone authentication
-	pricing – only 2 project for free
-	missing static site hosting, machine learning tools, push notifications or google analytics such as Firebase provides

## Comparison
Firebase provides static site hosting, machine learning tools, push notifications and google analytics. Supabase has not yet developed these features. Despite that Supabase is open source. Therefore developer can run Supabase with Docker and host own alternative of Supabase on Google cloud if needed. It is important to know that this way developer avoids vendor lock-in. For example using when Firebase developer is signing contract with Google when they can delete developers project if Google decides to also to migrate data to other database is hard.

Every Supabase project comes with a full Postgres database. PostgreSQL supports full text search, that is not possible in Firebase.

Building relations in PostgreSQL  - it can do faster reads, store larger amount of data, it is open source. Code – harder to build relationships in firebase, with PostgreSQL is easier to build relationships in relational database, it keeps data clean, structured. Supabase is still working to make it easy for developer to start using relational data.

## References
https://supabase.com/docs 

https://www.youtube.com/@Supabase

https://supabase.com/alternatives/supabase-vs-firebase


